A. Project and Background
Explain about your educational background and work experience.
Explain the project in detail.

                       B. Prometheus and Grafana

How to connect Prometheus and Grafana?
What are exporters in Prometheus?
What is the default time interval to scrape metrics from external servers in Prometheus?
How to connect external servers to Prometheus to collect metrics?
What is the import and export option in Grafana?
Can we see metrics in Prometheus without using Grafana?
How do the metrics get scraped in Prometheus?
What is the process that Prometheus uses to fetch metrics?
                        
                        C. Terraform

How to replace a resource that is provisioned by Terraform?
What is the terraform state mv command used for?
What does the terraform state rm command do?
What is the terraform fmt command used for?
How to delete a particular resource in Terraform?
How to delete all resources in one go in Terraform?
What is Terraform?
What are the main features of Terraform?
What is the difference between Terraform and other IaC tools like Ansible, Puppet, and Chef?
What is a provider in Terraform?
How does Terraform manage dependencies?
What is a state file in Terraform?
Why is it important to manage the state file in Terraform?
How can you secure the state file in Terraform?
What are modules in Terraform?
What is the purpose of the terraform init command?
What does the terraform plan command do?
What is the terraform apply command used for?
What is the purpose of the terraform destroy command?
What is a Terraform backend?
How do you handle sensitive data in Terraform?
What are Terraform workspaces?
What is the difference between terraform taint and terraform untaint?
What is the purpose of the terraform refresh command?
What are data sources in Terraform?
How can you import existing infrastructure into Terraform?
How do you upgrade Terraform versions?
What are Terraform output values?
What are Terraform’s limitations?
How do you handle dependencies in Terraform?
How do you deal with state file locking in Terraform?
What are the benefits of using remote backends?
What is the purpose of the terraform validate command?
What are depends_on in Terraform?
Describe a time when you had to troubleshoot a Terraform configuration issue.
What are the different ways to pass variables in Terraform?
If we are teammates and you use terraform and I don't use terraform then how will we be synced?
We both are working remotely in a team on the same project, then how would you sync the Terraform files?
Is it possible to install something like tools and libraries immediately after a resource is provisioned using Terraform?
How does Terraform manage dependencies between resources?
How to switch to the previous version of Terraform infrastructure?
How to provision an EC2 instance using Terraform? Explain the entire process.
What are local execution and remote execution in Terraform?
How to check what resources are provisioned using Terraform?
How to get changes to state management in Terraform which were changed manually through the AWS console?
How to preview changes in Terraform?
How to use Terraform workspaces to manage multiple environments?

                          D. Ansible

What are Ansible facts?
What is Ansible Vault?
What Is Inventory in Ansible?
What Are The Features Of Ansible?
What Command Will You Use To Run An Ansible Playbook With a Specific Inventory File?
Explain Ansible Inventory And Discuss Its Various Types.
What Are Loops in Ansible?
What Is The Ad-hoc Command In Ansible, And When Is It Typically Used?
If we want to reuse components in Ansible, what should we do?
What are Handlers in Ansible?
When is the "when" statement used in Ansible?
Is Ansible agentless?
Is there anything we have to install to use Ansible on the nodes?
Will Ansible work directly if we only mention the IP address of nodes in its config?
What is dynamic inventory and static inventory in Ansible?
How to check if host machines are responding in Ansible?
How to organize tasks into reusable components in Ansible?
What are Ansible roles?
What is the difference between ad-hoc commands and playbooks in Ansible?
What is the become module in Ansible?
What is Ansible Galaxy?
How do you dynamically generate inventory in Ansible?
How do you use conditionals and loops in Ansible playbooks?
Why do we use dynamic inventory in Ansible?
Can I run an Ansible playbook on Windows? Can Ansible be installed on Windows?
How to debug Ansible code?
Write an Ansible playbook to configure Git on all managed nodes.
What is a template in an Ansible role?
How to dynamically generate inventory in Ansible?
What is the difference between adhoc commands and playbooks in Ansible?
                     
                             E. Kubernetes

What is Kubernetes and what does it do?
How are Kubernetes and Docker linked?
List the features of Kubernetes.
What are clusters in Kubernetes?
What do you know about Kubectl?
What is a node in Kubernetes?
List the main components of Kubernetes architecture.
List the different types of services in Kubernetes.
What is Ingress network?
What is Egress in Kubernetes?
Differentiate between a ReplicaSet and a ReplicationController.
What is a deployment in Kubernetes?
Explain the Pod in Kubernetes.
What is the difference between a Pod and a Deployment?
What do you know about clusters of containers in Kubernetes?
Explain the two types of Kubernetes Pods.
Tell me about labels in Kubernetes.
What is a Persistent Volume in Kubernetes?
What is a Namespace in Kubernetes?
How can you achieve zero downtime in Kubernetes?
List of exceptions you might get while creating a Pod.
In Kubernetes, what is a Deployment and Services?
What is the use of Proxy in Kubernetes?
What is the difference between kubectl apply and kubectl create in Kubernetes?
How to rollback a deployment in Kubernetes? (Give command)
How to scale a deployment in Kubernetes? (Give command)
Different components of the Kubernetes master.
What is a Manifest File in Kubernetes?
How do you expose Pods using a NodePort service?
How do you set resource limits on Kubernetes Pods?
Explain Kubernetes taints and tolerations.
How does a Kubernetes Network Policy work?
What is an Init Container in Kubernetes?
How do you pass environment variables to a Kubernetes Pod?
What happens if a Pod is in the Pending state? What could be the reason?
What happens if your Pod gets terminated/crashed?
Is it okay to have two containers in one Pod? What would you suggest?
How to limit resources in a Pod?
How to deploy an application in Kubernetes?
My application is not accessible through the browser, what is the problem?
After deletion of a Pod, data gets deleted. How to retain Pod data?
What is a DaemonSet in Kubernetes?
How does a Deployment or Service know which Pods to manage in Kubernetes?
When should you use LoadBalancer and NodePort services in Kubernetes?
What are the different types of services in Kubernetes? (Also included in 8)
How to expose your applications in Kubernetes?
How to manually scale the replicas in Kubernetes?
How does Kubernetes handle rolling updates and rollbacks?

                       F. Docker

Tell me some about Hypervisor.
Can you state the advantages of Docker over Hypervisor?
Define Docker images.
What is the current Docker version?
Tell me something about Docker machine.
Define Docker Swarms.
Why we use Kubernetes instead of Docker Swarm?
Describe the usage of Dockerfile.
What is the command to build a Docker image from Dockerfile?
What is the command to run the image as a container?
What is the difference between ADD and COPY in Dockerfile?
What are Docker Namespaces?
Why is it necessary to monitor Docker?
Define Docker Compose.
What is depends_on in Docker Compose?
Describe the role of Docker load and save command.
Which is the most feasible type of application for Docker containers – Stateless or Stateful?
Differentiate between a Docker layer and an image.
What is Virtualization?
What if you have accidentally shut down the Docker containers, will you lose the files?
What are factors that decide the number of containers you can run on?
What is Dockerfile Instructions?
What is Docker Prune?
Why Docker is important for DevOps?
Please explain How Does Docker Work?
What is the difference between containerization and virtualization?
How do you keep your Docker images up to date?
How do you achieve zero-downtime deployments in Docker?
Docker commit
What is Port Mapping / Port Binding?
What is Docker Mount?
How can you link multiple Docker containers together?
How do you optimize a Docker image to reduce its size?
What is the difference between ENTRYPOINT and CMD in Docker?
How do you troubleshoot a failed container in Docker?
What happens if I run the CMD command multiple times?
I have an application and an application database, how do I deploy both in one using Docker?
I am trying to pull an image using the image name, but it’s not accessible through Docker Hub repo, so what is the problem?
What issue do you face while creating a container that created and stopped immediately?
What is multi-stage in Dockerfile?
How to bind volumes to a container in Docker?
How to configure a tool in Docker container if you already have the Docker image?
How to integrate a database with an application in Docker?
How to enter inside a running Docker container?

                              G. Jenkins

What is the difference between Freestyle and Pipeline jobs in Jenkins?
What is the difference between Declarative and Scripted Pipeline in Jenkins?
What is Jenkins?
What is Jenkins used for?
How to add a user in Jenkins?
What is a Jenkins Pipeline?
What is a Jenkinsfile?
What is continuous integration in Jenkins?
What are the software prerequisites for installing Jenkins?
How to take a backup of your Jenkins build jobs?
State some of the advantages of using Jenkins.
What are the requirements for using Jenkins?
What are some useful plugins in Jenkins?
How to integrate Git with Jenkins?
Name some of the SCM tools supported by Jenkins.
What is the relation between Hudson and Jenkins?
What will you do if there is a broken build in your Jenkins project?
How to schedule builds in Jenkins?
How to configure Jenkins with Maven?
How to create a slave node in Jenkins?
How do you install Jenkins?
Which commands can be used to begin Jenkins?
What is a CI/CD pipeline?
Which architecture is recommended for a scalable Jenkins environment?
How to change the port for Jenkins?
How to configure and use third-party tools in Jenkins?
How to set up a Jenkins job?
What are the steps included in a Jenkins pipeline?
What is the process for creating a backup and copying files in Jenkins?
How will you create a Pipeline in Jenkins?
How to configure Docker in Jenkins?
When can you use the GitHub plugin in Jenkins?
Name two ways a Jenkins node agent can be configured to communicate back with the Jenkins master.
How to turn off Jenkins Security if the administrative users have locked out of the admin console?
From one server to another, how do you copy or move your Jenkins jobs?
How to deploy from Jenkins?
What are the features of Jenkins?
Explain the process in which Jenkins works.
What is the process for securing Jenkins?
What is Groovy in Jenkins?
Explain a backup plugin and its uses.
What is a Ping Thread in Jenkins and how it works?
How do you implement a Blue-Green Deployment using Jenkins?
Explain how Jenkins integrates with Kubernetes.
How do you secure sensitive data in Jenkins?
Discuss the use of Jenkins Shared Libraries for pipeline reuse.
How to install a tool in Jenkins?
How to configure a tool in Jenkins?
How to connect Jenkins to Ansible? Explain the process.
How to connect Jenkins to Kubernetes?
How does Jenkins handle distributed builds?
What are the different Jenkins authentication methods?
Where can I see Jenkins build job output or logs other than the Jenkins console output?
How to configure a job in Jenkins?
How to customize a Jenkins pipeline?
How to optimize Jenkins pipelines if they are taking too long to execute?
What are distributed builds in Jenkins?
How do you integrate Jenkins with Docker?
What is Blue-Green Deployment in Jenkins?
                        
                                    H. Maven

What do you mean by Maven?
What are the features or advantages of Maven?
What is meant by Maven build lifecycle? Name these cycles.
What do you mean by POM and what does it contain?
What do you mean by a Maven Repository?
Explain Maven Artifact.
List down the various scopes of Maven Dependency.
What are the differences between Maven and Ant?
What do you mean by Maven Archetype?
What is known as SNAPSHOT in Maven?
What does goal in Maven mean?
Name the build phases in Maven Build Lifecycle.
How to add dependencies in Maven?
What is a build profile in Maven?
What is the naming format in groupId?
How can I identify my project in Maven?
What is transitive dependency in Maven?
Can we run a project without a Maven goal?
What is the difference between lifecycle and goals of Maven?
How does Maven Architecture work?
What is the command for offline Maven project creation?
Explain the difference between compile-time and runtime dependencies in Maven.
What is the purpose of a Maven plugin?
How do you create a Maven project from scratch?
How can you skip tests during a Maven build?
What is the purpose of the Maven Shade Plugin?
How can you create custom Maven plugins?
How can you specify a custom local repository location in Maven?
What is the Maven reactor?
How can you control the order of plugin executions in Maven?
What are Maven multi-module projects?
How to solve dependency errors in Maven?
What are the different build lifecycles of Maven?

                                  I. Git

What is Git?
What is a repository in Git?
What is the difference between Git and GitHub?
What is origin in Git?
What is the purpose of the .gitignore file?
What is the git push command?
What is the git pull command?
What does git clone do?
What are the advantages of using GIT?
What is the difference between git init and git clone?
What is git add?
What is git status?
What is a commit in Git?
What is the purpose of the git clean command?
What is a ‘conflict’ in git?
What is the meaning of “Index” in GIT?
How do you change the last commit in git?
What is git checkout?
How do you switch branches in Git?
Name some popular Git hosting services?
What is the command to delete a branch in the remote repository using Git CLI?
How to list remote repositories added to the local machine?
How to ignore tracking of some files in Git?
Intermediate Git Interview Questions and Answers
What is the difference between git fetch and git pull?
Explain Git rebase and when do you use it?
What differentiates between the commands git remote and git clone?
What are the benefits of using a pull request in a project?
What is a Git bundle?
What is git stash?
How do you revert a commit that has already been pushed and made public?
Explain the difference between reverting and resetting?
What is the difference between git reflog and log?
What is the HEAD in Git?
What is the purpose of git tag -a?
What is the difference between HEAD, working tree, and index in Git?
How to resolve a conflict in Git?
Explain the difference between git merge and git rebase and when you would use each?
What language is used in GIT?
How do you add a file to the staging area?
What is git diff?
Advanced Git Interview Questions for Experienced
What is the Git object model?
What is a git hook and how might you use it?
How does Git store data?
Explain what is meant by the "detached HEAD" state in Git?
Explain the difference between git reset, git revert, and git checkout?
How do you handle large files with Git?
What is the function of the git cherry-pick command?
What is a ‘bare repository’ in Git?
What is branching in Git?
What is Git and its types?
What is git merge --squash?
How to squash or combine selective commits?
What is the purpose of the "git bisect" command?
How can you check the history of commits for a particular file?
How to selectively remove specific commits from your branch history?
What is git blame?
What is git log --graph?
What is git branch -m?
How do you implement branch protection in GitHub?
What is an orphan branch in Git?
What is tagging in Git?
Lightweight tag
Annotated tag
What happens if I save a file but don't commit or deploy it in Git?
How to create a branch and switch to it in one command in Git?
How to implement branch protection in GitHub?

                                  J. AWS

What services in AWS give you high availability, fault tolerance, and scalability?
What is AWS CodePipeline and how does it automate the CI/CD process?
How does AWS CodeBuild work?
How to create custom policies in AWS?
What is the difference between AWS EBS and AWS EFS?
How does AWS Route 53 work?
Explain AWS CloudFormation and how it differs from Terraform.
What is AWS Fargate, and how does it work?
Types of Auto Scaling in AWS.
What is geo-targeting in CloudFront?
What is an Elastic Transcoder?
What is AWS Snowball?
What is Snowball Edge?
What is Amazon EC2?
What is the difference between authentication and authorization?
What is IAM (Identity and Access Management)?
What are EC2 instance types?
What are the different ways to connect with EC2?
What is the difference between a region and availability zones in AWS?
List of global services in AWS.
What is an Elastic IP?
What is Auto Scaling in AWS?
What are the different types of Load Balancers in AWS?
What is the difference between ALB and NLB?
What is the difference between security groups and NACLs?
What is the S3 Object Lifecycle?
What is the difference between AMI and Snapshot?
What is ECS (Elastic Container Service)?
What is RDS (Relational Database Service)?
What are the different database engines supported by AWS RDS?
What is AWS CloudFormation and how does it work?
What is a VPC and its components?
What is the difference between roles and policies in AWS?
What are the differences between ACLs and bucket policies in S3?
What is an edge location in AWS?
What is SSL and TLS certificates?
What is Amazon Resource Name (ARN)?
What is AAA in AWS?
What is AWS Secrets Manager?
What is AWS CLI?
What is AWS Lambda?
What other AWS services are used with AWS CodePipeline?
What is AWS CodeDeploy?
What is Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)?
What is the objective of CodePipeline?
What are the different types of storage in AWS?
What is Amazon SNS?
What is Amazon CloudWatch?
What is AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM)?
What is AWS Elastic Beanstalk?
What is Amazon CloudFront?
What is Amazon S3?
What is Amazon Route 53?
What is Amazon CloudTrail?
What is the difference between IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS?
What are the different cloud deployment models?
What is AWS Fargate, and how does it integrate with ECS and EKS?
How does AWS Auto Scaling work to ensure high availability and scalability?
 
                                    K. Linux

Define the basic components of Linux.
How do you mount and unmount filesystems in Linux?
How do you troubleshoot network connectivity issues in Linux?
How do you list all the processes running in Linux?
How do you check disk space usage?
How do you find the process ID (PID) of a running process?
How do you change the password for a user account?
What is the find command, and how do you use it?
What is a swap space?
What are the environmental variables?
What are the different modes when using the vi editor?
What is the ulimit command, and how do you use it?
What is grep command in Linux?
What is SMTP?
What is the difference between UDP and TCP?
What is the difference between absolute and relative paths in Linux?
How do you check the status of a service or daemon in Linux?
What is the difference between /etc/passwd and /etc/shadow files?
How do you compress and decompress files in Linux?
What is the sed command used for in Linux?
How to find and kill a process in Linux?
What is the purpose of the SSH protocol in Linux, and how do you securely connect to a remote server using SSH?
How do you check the contents of a file without opening it in Linux?
How do you change the ownership of a file or directory in Linux using the chown command?
What is the purpose of the ping command in Linux, and how do you test network connectivity to a remote host?
How do you recursively copy files and directories in Linux using the cp command?
How can you find the IP address of a Linux system?
Why do we use package managers in Linux?
How to create a user and generate an SSH key in Linux?
What is shell scripting and how can you run it in Linux?
Download a package in the system using Linux.
What is the wget command?
What is the AWK command in Linux?
What are Linux namespaces and cgroups?
How do you use systemd in Linux?
How to automate a script in Linux?
What is #!/bin/bash in a script?
How can I share my public key with a remote machine in Linux?
How can I check the configuration information in Linux?
What is a firewall in Linux?
How to create a user in Linux?
How to change the permission of a file for owner and group to read-only and others to none?
How to generate an SSH key for a user in Linux?
How to run a Linux script?
How to share a public key with a remote machine in Linux?
What does #!/bin/bash mean in a script?
How to automate a script in Linux?
How to kill a process in Linux?
When do you use df and du in Linux?
How to check the contents of a file without opening it in Linux?
What is the purpose of the ping command in Linux?

                             L. Python

What is an identifier in Python?
What is Type Conversion in Python?
What is Type Casting in Python?
What is concatenation in Python?
What is the difference between a Mutable datatype and an Immutable data type in Python?
What is Indexing in Python?
What is Slicing in Python?
What is Scope in Python?
What are the different Python frameworks?
What are the different data types in Python?
What is indentation in Python?
What is the init method in Python?
What is a class in Python?
What is an object in Python?
What is a function in Python?
What is a sequence in Python?
What are the differences between Lists, Tuples, Strings, and Ranges in Python?
What are the file modes in Python?
What is a module in Python?
What is Flask in Python?
Is Python a programming language or scripting language?
How to run Python code from the command line?
What is the keyword for defining a function in Python?
**What is the difference between Python's *args and kwargs?
Is Python case-sensitive?
What is Python Multiprocessing?
                         
                                  M. DevOps

Can we use Agile and DevOps together in the same project?
What is the difference between continuous delivery and continuous deployment?
What is the benefit of DevOps from a technical and business perspective?
How does chaos engineering work in DevOps?
What is log aggregation, and how does it work in DevOps?
