1. what is ansible facts
  in ansible ansible facts is a peice of information about the system like os hardware software

2. what is ansible vauld 
  it is used to to encrypt the sensitive data such as password api key and confidensial data 
  ansible-vault encrypt filename 

3. What Is Inventory ?
  In Ansible, an inventory is a file with specifying the information of hosts that going to be managed.
  It contains information such as hostnames, IP addresses.
  webserver1 ansible_host=192.168.1.11

4. What Are The Features Of Ansible ?
  1. it is agentless
  2. Playbooks: Automation scripts in Ansible are known as playbooks. Playbooks are written in YAML by defining 
   a set of tasks that to be executed on remotely specifying in the hosts section.
  3. Modules: Modules are used in ansible to perform specific tasks on managed nodes.They are 2 types of modules as
   built-in modules ( that are already created and comes with ansible ) and custom modules that are created by users.
   like yum,apt,sevices modules 
  4. Inventory Management: Ansible uses an inventory file to specify the hosts

5. What Command Will You Use To Run An Ansible Playbook With a Specific Inventory File?
  ansible-playbook -i /path/to/your/inventory/file   myplaybook.yml

6. Explain Ansible Inventory And Discuss Its Various Types.
  Ansible Inventory is a list of managed nodes. It can be static that is manually defined or dynamic
  that is generated by scripts. Dynamic inventories will fetch information from external sources like cloud providers.

7. loops 
  we used loops for repetitive tasks..?

8. What Is The Ad-hoc Command In Ansible, And When Is It Typically Used?
   It is used to execute a module in the target machine.	
   ansible all -m ping
   ansible samplenode1 -m copy -a "src=/etc/ansible/file1.txt dest=/home/ansibleadmin"

9. 13. If we want to use reuseable components in ansible then what to do
	--> Ansible roles

10 . Handlers in ansible
   handlers are used to reload start stop restart any service 
   handlers are same as task but it will be execute when it will be notify.

11. When in ansible
  The when statement is used to run a task only when a specific condition is met.

	16. Is ansible agentless?
     yes 

	17. Is there anything we have to install to use ansible in the nodes
  No, Ansible is agentless, so you don’t need to install anything on the managed nodes 

	18. Will ansible work directly if we only mention the IP address of nodes in its config
   Yes, Ansible can directly use IP addresses of nodes, whether you're specifying them in an inventory 
   file or on the command line.
   The key requirement is that your control node can communicate with the target nodes over SSH
   (for Linux/Unix) or WinRM (for Windows) with appropriate authentication credentials.

	19. What is dynamic inventory and static inventory in ansible

20. In ansible know status of host machines are responding or not from ansible controller command
    ansible all -m ping

21. In ansible organize tasks into reusable components 
     Roles are a way to organize playbooks into reusable

22. Ansible roles
  
23. In ansible what is playbook and adobe commands 
   It is used to execute a module in the target machine.	
   An ad-hoc command in Ansible is a one-time task that is executed from the command line without needing to write a playbook.

24. In ansible what is become module
  it is used to give the prevlege like sudo or any user for that we need to add become_user: devopsadmin

25. What is ansible galaxy
	  ansible galaxy is used for reusability  by creating roles..

26. How do you dynamically generate inventory in Ansible?
  Using a database inventory plugin (MySQL)
    plugin: mysql_db
    hostname: "{{ db_host }}"
    username: "{{ db_user }}"
    password: "{{ db_password }}"
  Using ansible-inventory Command
    ansible-inventory -i dynamic_inventory.py --list   -  Flexible and customizable to query any system.
    ansible-inventory -i aws_ec2.yml --list          - Easier and pre-configured for AWS environments.

27 How do you use conditionals and loops in Ansible playbooks?
   we want to execute something when a condition is met where we can use contionals like when failed changed 

28. why we use dynamic inventory
    dynamic inventory will automatically fetcg the information about the hosts from the cloud platforms like aws 
    Hostnames or IP addresses Instance IDs, Instance type
   Ansible provides built-in dynamic inventory plugins like aws_ec2, so you don’t need to write the script yourself. 
   
---
- name: Install Git and Maven on all servers
  hosts: all
  become: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Install Git on RedHat/CentOS
      yum:
        name: git
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "RedHat"

    - name: Install Maven on RedHat/CentOS
      yum:
        name: maven
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "RedHat"

    - name: Install Git on Debian/Ubuntu
      apt:
        name: git
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "Debian"

    - name: Install Maven on Debian/Ubuntu
      apt:
        name: maven
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "Debian"

    - name: Install Git on Windows
      win_chocolatey:
        name: git
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "Windows"

    - name: Install Maven on Windows
      win_chocolatey:
        name: maven
        state: present
      when: ansible_os_family == "Windows"

can I run ansible playbook on windows or can I install ansible on windows
yes One of the most common ways to run Ansible on Windows is to use WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux). 
    open powershel and run  wsl --install
    sudo apt update
    sudo apt install ansible


defaults/: Default variables for the role.
files/: Static files to copy to the target system.
handlers/: Handlers for triggering specific actions (e.g., service restart).
meta/: Metadata about the role, like dependencies.
tasks/: The core tasks that define what the role does.
templates/: Jinja2 templates for generating dynamic configuration files.
vars/: Variables specific to the role that have higher precedence than defaults.
README.md (optional): Documentation for the role.


how to debug ansible 
we use ansible-playbook -vvv my_playbook.yml
-vvv This is very useful for tracing where the problem is occurring.



What is Ansible?

What are the key features of Ansible?

How does Ansible differ from other configuration management tools?

What is the architecture of Ansible?

What is an inventory file in Ansible?

How do you define hosts in an Ansible inventory file?

What are Ansible modules?

Name some common Ansible modules.

What is an Ansible playbook?

What is YAML? Why is it used in Ansible playbooks?

How do you run an Ansible playbook?

What is an Ansible role?

How do you create and use roles in Ansible?

What is the purpose of the ansible.cfg file?

How do you check connectivity with Ansible?

What is the difference between ansible and ansible-playbook commands?

How do you pass variables to Ansible playbooks?

What are facts in Ansible?

How do you gather facts in Ansible?

How do you use conditionals in Ansible?

What is an Ansible template?

How do you use Jinja2 templates in Ansible?

What is the purpose of the handlers section in a playbook?

How do handlers work in Ansible?

What is an Ansible Galaxy?

How do you install roles from Ansible Galaxy?

What are loops in Ansible?

How do you perform loops in a playbook?

How do you handle errors in Ansible playbooks?

What is an idempotent operation?

Why is idempotency important in Ansible?

What is the purpose of register in Ansible?

How do you use the debug module?

How do you secure sensitive data in Ansible?

What is Ansible Vault?

How do you create and use encrypted files with Ansible Vault?

How do you limit playbook execution to certain hosts?

What is a dynamic inventory?

How do you create a dynamic inventory?

What is a callback plugin in Ansible?

How do you use tags in Ansible playbooks?

What is the use of --check option?

What does the --diff option do?

What is a connection plugin?

What connection types does Ansible support?

How do you run Ansible playbooks asynchronously?

What is the difference between local and ssh connection types?

How do you debug Ansible playbooks?

What is a task in Ansible?

How do you use include and import statements?

What are variables precedence levels in Ansible?

What is the use of set_fact module?

How do you pass extra variables at runtime?

How do you conditionally include tasks?

What are Ansible facts cache?

How do you update Ansible to the latest version?

How do you write custom modules?

What is the difference between roles and playbooks?

How do you schedule Ansible playbooks?

How do you integrate Ansible with Jenkins?

What is an Ansible Tower?

What are the advantages of Ansible Tower?

How do you manage inventories in Ansible Tower?

How does Ansible handle dependencies between tasks?

How do you use when clause in Ansible?

What is the use of with_items?

How do you pause a playbook execution?

How do you handle retries in Ansible?

What is delegate_to used for?

How do you run a task on a different host?

What is serial keyword in Ansible?

How do you parallelize tasks in Ansible?

How do you use the wait_for module?

What are the best practices for writing Ansible playbooks?

What is the difference between include_tasks and import_tasks?

What is the ansible-pull command?

How do you run Ansible in a push model?

How do you run Ansible in a pull model?

What is idempotency and why is it important in Ansible?

How do you use the copy module?

How do you manage Windows hosts with Ansible?

How do you upgrade Ansible roles?

What is a fact cache and why is it useful?

How do you handle variables in group_vars and host_vars?

How do you write a loop with multiple variables?

What is the difference between notify and handlers?

How do you use Ansible modules vs shell commands?

What is the purpose of the gather_facts directive?

How do you disable fact gathering?

How do you check Ansible version?

What is the difference between ansible and ansible-playbook commands?

How do you debug a failing playbook?

What is the role of the meta module?

How do you clear facts cache?

What is the purpose of async in Ansible tasks?

What is the use of poll parameter?

How do you use Ansible with Docker?

What is the significance of the block directive?

How do you use rescue and always in Ansible blocks?

How do you extend Ansible with plugins?










 
