1. what is ansible facts
  in ansible ansible facts is a peice of information about the system like os hardware software

2. what is ansible vauld 
  it is used to to encrypt the sensitive data such as password api key and confidensial data 
  ansible-vault encrypt filename 

3. What Is Inventory ?
  In Ansible, an inventory is a file with specifying the information of hosts that going to be managed.
  It contains information such as hostnames, IP addresses.
  webserver1 ansible_host=192.168.1.11

4. What Are The Features Of Ansible ?
  1. it is agentless
  2. Playbooks: Automation scripts in Ansible are known as playbooks. Playbooks are written in YAML by defining 
   a set of tasks that to be executed on remotely specifying in the hosts section.
  3. Modules: Modules are used in ansible to perform specific tasks on managed nodes.They are 2 types of modules as
   built-in modules ( that are already created and comes with ansible ) and custom modules that are created by users.
   like yum,apt,sevices modules 
  4. Inventory Management: Ansible uses an inventory file to specify the hosts

5. What Command Will You Use To Run An Ansible Playbook With a Specific Inventory File?
  ansible-playbook -i /path/to/your/inventory/file   myplaybook.yml

6. Explain Ansible Inventory And Discuss Its Various Types.
  Ansible Inventory is a list of managed nodes. It can be static that is manually defined or dynamic
  that is generated by scripts. Dynamic inventories will fetch information from external sources like cloud providers.

7. loops 
  we used loops for repetitive tasks..?

8. What Is The Ad-hoc Command In Ansible, And When Is It Typically Used?
   It is used to execute a module in the target machine.	
   ansible all -m ping
   ansible samplenode1 -m copy -a "src=/etc/ansible/file1.txt dest=/home/ansibleadmin"

9. 13. If we want to use reuseable components in ansible then what to do
	--> Ansible roles

10 . Handlers in ansible
   handlers are used to reload start stop restart any service 
   handlers are same as task but it will be execute when it will be notify.

11. When in ansible
  The when statement is used to run a task only when a specific condition is met.

	16. Is ansible agentless?
     yes 

	17. Is there anything we have to install to use ansible in the nodes
  No, Ansible is agentless, so you don’t need to install anything on the managed nodes 

	18. Will ansible work directly if we only mention the IP address of nodes in its config
   Yes, Ansible can directly use IP addresses of nodes, whether you're specifying them in an inventory 
   file or on the command line.
   The key requirement is that your control node can communicate with the target nodes over SSH
   (for Linux/Unix) or WinRM (for Windows) with appropriate authentication credentials.

	19. What is dynamic inventory and static inventory in ansible

20. In ansible know status of host machines are responding or not from ansible controller command
    ansible all -m ping

21. In ansible organize tasks into reusable components 
     Roles are a way to organize playbooks into reusable

22. Ansible roles
  
23. In ansible what is playbook and adobe commands 
   It is used to execute a module in the target machine.	
   An ad-hoc command in Ansible is a one-time task that is executed from the command line without needing to write a playbook.

24. In ansible what is become module
  it is used to give the prevlege like sudo or any user for that we need to add become_user: devopsadmin

25. What is ansible galaxy
	  ansible galaxy is used for reusability  by creating roles..

26. How do you dynamically generate inventory in Ansible?
  Using a database inventory plugin (MySQL)
    plugin: mysql_db
    hostname: "{{ db_host }}"
    username: "{{ db_user }}"
    password: "{{ db_password }}"
  Using ansible-inventory Command
    ansible-inventory -i dynamic_inventory.py --list

27 How do you use conditionals and loops in Ansible playbooks?
   we want to execute something when a condition is met where we can use contionals like when failed 























 
