Q1. Define the basic components of Linux

Majorly there are five basic components of Linux:
Kernel: Linux kernel is a core part of the operating system that works as a bridge between hardware and software.
Shell: Shell is an interface between a kernel and a user.

Q2. How do you mount and unmount filesystems in Linux?

mount is used to attach a storage device (like a hard drive, USB drive, or disk image) to a specific directory (mount point) in the filesystem.
sudo mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt/mydrive

umount is used to remove the device from the directory once you're done with it.
sudo umount /mnt/mydrive


Q3 How do you troubleshoot network connectivity issues in Linux?

Check Physical and Wi-Fi Connections: Ensure your device is properly connected to the network (Wi-Fi or Ethernet).
Test Local Network (Router and Gateway): Verify your device can communicate with the router or gateway.
Verify Internet Access: Try accessing websites to check if the internet is working.
Check DNS Configuration: Ensure correct DNS settings to resolve domain names.
Firewall or Security Software: Make sure firewalls or security software aren’t blocking internet access.
ISP or External Issues: If nothing works, check if the issue is with your ISP or an external network problem.
restart network: 

Q4  How do you list all the processes running in Linux?

ps aux: Lists all processes running on the system with detailed information (like CPU and memory usage).
top: Shows a real-time, continuously updating list of processes running on the system.
htop: Similar to top, but with a more user-friendly, interactive interface (requires installation).
pgrep -a <process_name>: Finds and lists all processes matching  specific name or pattern.

Q5  How do you check disk space usage?

df -h: Displays disk space usage for all mounted file systems in a human-readable format (e.g., GB, MB).

du -sh <directory>: Shows the total disk space used by a specific directory in a human-readable format.

df Command:
The df or disk-free 
du Command:
The du or disk usage 

Q6 How do you find the process ID (PID) of a running process?

pgrep <process_1>

Q7 How do you change the password for a user account?

passwd username 

Q8 What is the find command, and how do you use it?

The find command in Linux is used to search for files and directories 
find <directory> <options> <expression>

Q9 What is a swap space? 

Swap space is a portion of a computer's hard drive or solid-state drive (SSD) that is used as virtual memory when the physical RAM (Random Access Memory) is fully utilized. 

In simple terms, swap space is like a helper that comes into play when your computer's memory is full, but it’s not as fast as your computer's regular memory (RAM).

Q10 What are the environmental variables?

Environment variables are predefined instructions like we have PATH env variable to define a path then we have HOME to define where files are store we have USER like tht 
we have lots of env variables.

Q11 What are the different modes when using the vi editor?

Command Mode/ Regular Mode: Use the command Esc to enter Command Mode from any other mode.
Insertion Mode/Edit Mode: You have to press i to enter Insertion Mode from Command Mode.
Ex Mode/ Replacement Mode: You have to press the “:” (colon) to enter Ex Mode from Command Mode.

Q12 What is the ulimit command, and how do you use it?

You can use the ulimit command to set the limit on the system resource to prevent consuming the higher resources. 
This command contains multiple options to set the limit. For example, you can use the u option to set a maximum number of processes to 50:

ulimit -u 50 

Q13 what is grep:  command in linux 

In short, grep is a searching tool that makes it easy to find text patterns in files and directories quickly and efficiently.

Imagine you have a large document or a bunch of text files, and you want to find a specific word, phrase, or pattern. 
Instead of manually searching, you can use grep to automatically find and display lines that match what you're looking for.

Find the word "apple" in a file named fruits.txt:

grep 'apple' fruits.txt

q14 What is SMTP? 

SMTP stands for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. It is a standard protocol used to send emails across the internet. 
Think of it as the "postman" of the internet, delivering your email messages from your computer to the recipient's mail server.

Q15 What is the difference between UDP and TCP?

UDP (User Datagram Protocol) and TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) are both protocols used for sending data over the internet
TCP is reliable, slow, and ensures data is delivered correctly.
UDP is fast, but does not guarantee delivery or order, making it suitable for applications where speed is more important than accuracy (like live streaming or gaming).


Q16 What is the difference between absolute and relative paths in Linux?

Absolute Path
Definition: An absolute path is the complete, full path from the root directory (/) to the file or directory. 

Relative Path
Definition: A relative path is the path relative to your current working directory.

Q17 How do you check the status of a service or daemon in Linux?

systemctl status apache2

Q18 What is the difference between /etc/passwd and /etc/shadow files?

The /etc/passwd file stores essential user information like usernames, user IDs, home directories, and default shells. Each line in the file represents a user account.

The /etc/shadow file contains encrypted passwords and other security-related information. It is only accessible by the root user or privileged processes

Q19 How do you compress and decompress files in Linux? 

tar -czvf jayesh.tar.gz files
tar -czvf jayesh.tar.gz files

Q20 What is the sed command used for in Linux?

In short, sed helps you make quick and automatic changes to text in files without needing to open them in an editor! 

The sed command in Linux stands for stream editor. It is a powerful text manipulation tool used to process and modify text in files or streams (like output from other commands).
You can use sed to perform various operations like search, replace, delete, and insert text in files, without opening them in an editor.

Q21 How to find and kill a process in Linux?

ps aux | grep <process>
kill <PID>

If you don’t want to find the PID, then you can use the pkill command to kill a process by its name:
pkill <process>

Q22 What is the purpose of the SSH protocol in Linux, and how do you securely connect to a remote server using SSH?

SSH the secure shell it is used to securely establish the connection bwn client server machine and the host machine 
ssh username@remote_ip

Q23 How do you check the contents of a file without opening it in Linux? 

using cat command

Q24 How do you change the ownership of a file or directory in Linux using the chown command?

chown [OPTION] USER[:GROUP] FILE...

Q25 What is the purpose of the ping command in Linux, and how do you test network connectivity to a remote host?

Ping command is used to test the network connectively between the local and remote hosts.

ping remote_host_ip

Q26 How do you recursively copy files and directories in Linux using the cp command? 

cp -R folder1 /destination/


Q27 How can you find the IP address of a Linux system?

The ‘ifconfig’ or ‘ip addr show’ command can be used to display the IP address of a Linux system.

Q28 why we use package managers 

Package Managers are used to install/Uninstall/Upgrade the Packages/software 
		
				- Centos / RHEL 		===> 	yum package Manager 
				- Debian / Ubuntu 		===>	apt/apt-get package Manager 
				- Fedora				===>	dnf (Latest Version of Fedora)
												yum (Previous Version of Fedora)



















































































